Telegram
PRIMER
Table of Contents
Introduction
Problem Statement
Outline of the Vision
A Brief History of Telegram
Telegram Open Network (TON)
TON Blockchain 
Infinite Sharding Paradigm
Instant Hypercube Routing
Proof-of-Stake Approach
2-D Distributed Ledgers
TON Platform 
TON Storage
TON Proxy 
TON Services
TON DNS
TON Payments
Telegram Messenger-TON Integration
Light Wallet
External Secure IDs
Ecosystem
Bot Platform
Groups and Channels
Digital Content and Physical Goods
A Gateway to Decentralized Services
Uses of TON as a Cryptocurrency
Roadmap
Token Distribution
Use of Funds
Governance
Te a m
Founders
Other Notable Team Members
3
3
4
5
7
7
7
8
8
8
8
8
9
9
9
9
10
10
11
12
12
12
12
13
13
14
15
17
18
19
19
20
2 / 23
Introduction
Cryptocurrencies and other blockchain-based technologies have the potential 
to make the world more secure and self-governed. However, to this day, 
no consensus-backed currency has been able to appeal to the mass market 
and reach mainstream adoption.
This paper outlines a vision for a new cryptocurrency and an ecosystem capable of meeting the 
needs of hundreds of millions of consumers, including 200 million Telegram users.
Launching in 2018, this cryptocurrency will be based on multi-blockchain Proof-of-Stake system — 
TON (Telegram Open Network, after 2021 The Open Network) — designed to host a new generation 
of cryptocurrencies and decentralized applications.
The protocol and other components of TON are described in detail in the Technical White Paper, while this document focuses 
on a general overview of the proposed technology and its uses.
Problem Statement
Bitcoin has established itself as the «digital gold», and Ethereum has proved to be an efficient 
platform for token crowd sales. However, there is no current standard cryptocurrency used for the 
regular exchange of value in the daily lives of ordinary people. The blockchain ecosystem needs 
a decentralized counterpart to everyday money — a truly mass-market cryptocurrency.
3 / 23
Despite their revolutionary potential, existing cryptocurrencies lack the qualities required to attract 
the mass consumer. There are three main hurdles in today’s environments: 
The established blockchain networks — Bitcoin and Ethereum — play important 
roles in the ecosystem, but don’t have the capacity to replace VISA or Mastercard. 
In their current architecture they are limited to a maximum of only 7 transactions 
per second for Bitcoin and 15 transactions per second for Ethereum, resulting 
in insufficient speeds and higher transaction costs.
Regular users starting to engage with Bitcoin and similar technologies often get 
confused when trying to buy, store, and send their coins. 
The market of goods and services that can be bought with cryptocurrencies 
is limited, and the demand for crypto-assets comes mainly from investors, 
not consumers.
The current state of blockchain technology resembles automobile design in 1870: it is promising and 
praised by enthusiasts, but inefficient and too complicated to appeal to the mass consumer. As a 
result, no cryptocurrency or decentralized platform has gone truly mainstream, and centralized 
solutions continue to dominate the market.
Outline of the Vision
Exchanging value should be as easy as exchanging information, and blockchain technology offers 
the ideal foundation to make this a reality. To reach mainstream adoption, a cryptocurrency — 
and its underlying blockchain design and ecosystem — requires: 
Speed and scalability that allows for processing millions of transactions per 
second and accommodating hundreds of millions of active users and millions 
of applications. 
Intuitive user interfaces that enable an average user to easily buy, store, 
and transfer value, as well as use decentralized apps in a natural way.
An engaged user base that serves as the pre-existing critical mass necessary 
for the ecosystem to grow and eventually become adopted by hundreds of millions 
of users.
4 / 23
Telegram is uniquely positioned to establish the first mass-market cryptocurrency 
by providing a platform that combines these properties.
Telegram will use its expertise in encrypted distributed data storage to create TON, a fast and 
inherently scalable multi-blockchain architecture. TON can be regarded as a decentralized 
supercomputer and value transfer system. By combining minimum transaction time with maximum 
security, TON can become a VISA/Mastercard alternative for the new decentralized economy.
The Telegram Team will rely on its 10-year experience in building user-friendly interfaces for 
tens of millions to create light wallets, exchanges, and identification services that will allow users 
to get on board with cryptocurrencies in an intuitive way.
Integrated into Telegram applications, the TON wallet will become 
the world’s most adopted cryptocurrency wallet.
Telegram will leverage its existing ecosystem of communities, developers, publishers, payment 
providers, and merchants to drive demand and value for TON cryptocurrency. A whole new 
economy saturated with goods and services sold for cryptocurrency will be born — similar 
to WeChat’s fiat-based marketplace, but not confined to a centralized service.
A Brief History of Telegram
Telegram was founded in 2013 by libertarians to preserve freedom through encryption. The 
project has declared not-for-profit goals and remains independent and self-funded. Like 
Wikipedia, which for years has been a role model for the Telegram founders1, Telegram has 
chosen a .org domain to emphasize its non-commercial status.
The physical infrastructure of Telegram reflects its founders’ belief in larger decentralization. 
Telegram deploys a distributed server infrastructure to synchronize encrypted data across multiple 
independent server clusters spread across different continents and jurisdictions. 
The resulting combination of speed, encryption, and independence attracted millions of users 
within a few months after the project’s launch2 in 2013. Telegram kept evolving with an average 
of 12 major updates a year. By February 2016, it had 100 million monthly active users and was 
delivering 15 billion messages daily.
1. Founder of Facebook for Russia donates $1M to Wikipedia at DLD.
2. Why Telegram has become the hottest messaging app in the world.
5 / 23
In October 2017, Telegram reached 170 million monthly users, delivering 70 billion messages every 
day.3 At least 500 000 new users join Telegram daily. At this rate, the service is expected to hit 
200 million monthly users in Q1 2018. These users can provide the required critical mass to push 
cryptocurrencies towards widespread adoption. 
3. Push notifications delivered on iOS and Android devices daily.
6 / 23
Telegram 
Open Network (TON)
Because taking cryptocurrencies mainstream in 2018 would not be possible using the 
existing blockchain platforms,4 Telegram co-founder Dr. Nikolai Durov set out to find 
a novel solution to meet the speed and scalability required for mass adoption. His 
research resulted in the design for the Telegram Open Network — a fast and secure 
blockchain and network project.
BLOCKCHAIN
PL AT FO RM
TON
TON Blockchain 
At the core of the platform is the TON Blockchain — a scalable and flexible blockchain architecture5 
that consists of a master chain and up to 292 accompanying blockchains. Below are some notable 
design choices that allow the TON Blockchain to process millions of transactions per second.
Infinite Sharding Paradigm
To achieve scalability, TON has built-in support for sharding: TON blockchains can 
automatically split and merge to accommodate changes in load. This means that new blocks 
are always generated quickly and the absence of long queues helps keep transaction costs 
low, even if some of the services using the platform become massively popular.
See «Infinite Sharding Paradigm», 2 .1. 2.
4. See sections 2.8 and 2.9 in the Technical White Paper for a comparison of blockchain projects.
5. See section 2 in the Technical White Paper.
7 / 23
Instant Hypercube Routing
TON blockchains use smart routing mechanisms to ensure that transactions between any two 
blockchains will always be processed swiftly, regardless of the size of the system. The time 
needed to pass information between TON blockchains grows logarithmically with their number, 
so scaling to even millions of chains will allow them all to communicate at top speed.
See «Hypercube Routing» and «Instant Hypercube Routing», 2.1.4, 2.4.19, 2.4.20.
Proof-of-Stake Approach
TON uses a Proof-of-Stake approach in which processing nodes («validators») deposit stakes 
to guarantee their dependability and reach consensus through a variant of the Byzantine Fault 
Tolerant protocol. This allows TON to focus the computing power of its nodes on handling 
transactions and smart contracts, further increasing speed and efficiency.
See «Proof-Of-Stake Approach», 2.1.16, 2.6.
2-D Distributed Ledgers
TON can «grow» new valid blocks on top of any blocks that were proven to be incorrect to 
avoid unnecessary forks. This self-healing mechanism saves resources and guarantees that 
valid transactions will not be discarded due to unrelated errors.
See «Account chains», 2.1.1, 2.1.17.
8 / 23
TON Platform 
As a multi-blockchain project, TON requires sophisticated network protocols — such as the TON 
P2P Network used to access the TON blockchains6 — that can be reused to give a significant boost 
in flexibility to the platform. The following components are scheduled to be released after the TON 
Blockchain core and will further increase the potential uses of the TON infrastructure.
TON Storage
TON Storage is a distributed file-storage technology, accessible through the TON P2P 
Network and available for storing arbitrary files, with torrent-like access technology and 
smart contracts used to enforce availability. This component not only enables storage services 
akin to a distributed Dropbox, but also paves the way for more complex decentralized apps that 
require storing large amounts of data, such as Youtube — or Telegram.
See «TON Storage», 4 .1.8 and «Is it possible to upload Facebook into blockchain?» 2 .9.13.
TON Proxy 
TON Proxy is a network proxy/anonymizer layer used to hide the identity and IP addresses 
of TON nodes. Similar to I2P (Invisible Internet Project), this layer can be used to create 
decentralized VPN services and blockchain-based TOR alternatives to achieve anonymity and 
protect online privacy. In conjunction with the TON P2P Network and TON DNS, TON Proxy 
can make any service, including Telegram, effectively immune to censorship.
See «TON Proxy», 3.1.6, 4.1.6.
6. See «TON Networking», Section 3 of the technical whitepaper.
9 / 23
TON Services
TON Services provides a platform for third-party services of any kind that enables 
smartphone-like friendly interfaces for decentralized apps and smart contracts, as well as a 
World Wide Web-like decentralized browsing experience.
See «TON Services and Applications», 4.
TON DNS
TON DNS is a service for assigning human-readable names to accounts, smart contracts, 
services, and network nodes. With TON DNS, accessing decentralized services can be similar 
to viewing a website on the World Wide Web.
See «TON DNS», 4.3.1, 4.3.2, 4.3.3.
TON Payments
TON Payments is a platform for micropayments and a micropayment channel network. It 
can be used for instant off-chain value transfers between users, bots, and other services. 
Safeguards built into the system ensure that these transfers are as secure as on-chain 
transactions.
See «TON Payments», Lightning-style off-chain transactions, 5.
All these services can be integrated with third-party messaging and social networking applications, 
uniting the centralized and the decentralized worlds. 
10 / 23
Telegram Messenger-TON 
Integration
Telegram-TON integration will provide a clear path to cryptocurrencies for millions 
of people. Telegram Messenger will not only serve as an example of the possibilities 
offered by integrating with TON, but will also add unique features to the TON 
platform, leveraging Telegram’s massive user base and developed ecosystem.
Light Wallet
The TON architecture supports light clients that can run on mobile devices without consuming 
significant resources. TON light wallets will be built into Telegram applications, allowing millions of 
users to store their funds securely in the TON blockchain. The wallet owners will be the sole holders 
of the corresponding encryption keys.
See «Merkle proofs», 2 . 3 .11; «Light wallet and TON entity explorer..», 4.3.19.
Telegram mobile and desktop applications with integrated wallets will also double as TON clients, 
enabling secure transfers of value within the TON blockchain and interaction with TON smart 
contracts and applications. Telegram will offer streamlined interfaces for sending value to contacts 
and paying for purchases in TON.
See «TON DNS use cases», 4.3.2; «Light wallet and TON entity explorer..», 4.3.19; TON Payments, 5.
Integrated into Telegram applications, the TON-Telegram wallet will instantly become the world’s 
most adopted cryptocurrency wallet.
The TON coins exchanged by Telegram users will be called «Grams» and denoted by the TON 
triangular symbol or the  gem emoji. The Gram will serve as the principal currency for the in-app 
economy on Telegram, and, like any other cryptocurrency, will be available for external use.
11 / 23
External Secure IDs
According to Tokenmarket, 84 percent of blockchain-based projects have an active Telegram 
community, more than all other chat applications combined.7 Forbes and other media outlets have 
called Telegram the «cryptocurrency world’s preferred messaging app» and «as ubiquitous to the 
cryptocurrency world as Snapchat is to a teenager».8
OFFICIAL ICO
DISCUSSION GROUPS
84%
78%
53%
64%
51%
57%
Past
Current
Upcoming
238 projects
79 projects
113 projects
2%3%5%
TELEGRAMSLACKDISCORD
Based on data from Tokenmarket.net for Oct 2017.
Because the majority of actors in the new digital economy already have active Telegram accounts, 
it is natural for Telegram to offer a secure universal ID. After passing KYC-AML on Telegram 
once, users will get a virtual passport to log into services that require user verification, thereby 
eliminating a major point of friction for anyone engaging with crypto-assets.
All private data (such as passport scans) will eventually be stored end-to-end encrypted with a key 
known only to the owners. Telegram’s distributed servers (and later the TON Blockchain) will 
have no access to this information, but will instead store a hash of the value to be able to confirm 
that the data was verified when the user obtained their secure ID. Third parties will be able to add 
further verifications to these virtual passports. 
7. Data from Tokenmarket, as of October 2017.
8. Russia Fines Cryptocurrency World's Preferred Messaging App, Telegram.
12 / 23
Ecosystem
Telegram’s existing ecosystem will offer simple ways of buying the TON coins (Grams), and a range 
of services to spend them on, driving demand and fundamental value for the cryptocurrency.
Bot Platform
As of October 2017, more than 800 000 unique third-party bots are regularly used by 52 
million Telegram users. These bots can already accept credit card payments from users in 200 
countries via eight providers connected to the Telegram Payments Platform.9 In the future, by 
using their verified IDs in conjunction with bots that accept credit cards, Telegram users will be 
able to buy and exchange cryptocurrencies in a frictionless and legally compliant way.
Telegram will provide a unified entry point for users willing to connect with bots that offer 
exchange services, effectively creating a competitive market.
Groups and Channels
The Telegram ecosystem includes millions of public group chats reaching up to 30 000 
members and broadcast channels, the largest of which have several million subscribers. 
Telegram’s public broadcast channels generate over 30 billion views by 80 million users each 
month. Creators of large channels currently try to monetize them by posting advertisements 
or promoting other channels and groups. However, they presently lack the necessary tools to 
formalize their transactions with advertisers.
To fix this, Telegram will launch a TON-based ad exchange where parties interested in 
promoting their projects can connect with the relevant channel owners and negotiate a price 
in a transparent and fully automated way. All accompanying transactions will be made in 
Grams on a per-view or per-click basis, with the necessary statistics and guarantees provided 
to all parties.
Digital Content and Physical Goods
Bots, channels, and groups provide a ready market for paid content and subscription services. 
Users will be able to support publishers and content creators by making donations or paying 
for exclusive access. Bots can act as virtual storefronts and accept orders for the delivery of 
physical goods. Telegram’s in-app economy will supply the TON market with a wide range of 
goods and services that can be obtained with TON coins.
9. Bot API Payments: https://core.telegram.org/bots/payments.
13 / 23
A Gateway to Decentralized Services
Telegram will offer a searchable registry of decentralized services from its applications, 
providing a list of the most popular apps, as well as recommendations based on the user’s 
history of choices. These steps can make Telegram a gateway to blockchain-based projects 
for the masses — similar to how Google Play and the App Store currently work for centralized 
applications. 
Uses of TON 
as a Cryptocurrency
In addition to payments for all digital and physical assets sold by individual 
merchants within the Telegram ecosystem and on other projects integrated with 
TON, the TON coins (Grams) will be used as:
› Commission («gas») paid to TON nodes («validators») for processing transactions 
and smart contracts;
› Stakes deposited by validators to be eligible to validate transactions and generate 
new blocks and coins;
› Capital lent out to validators in exchange for a share of their reward;
› Voting power required to support or oppose changes in the parameters 
of the protocol;
› Payment for services provided by apps built on the platform (TON Services);
› Payment for storing data securely in a decentralized way (TON Storage);
› Payment for registering blockchain-based domain names (TON DNS) and hosting 
TON-sites (TON WWW);
› Payment for hiding identity and IP addresses (TON Proxy);
› Payment for bypassing censorship imposed by local ISPs (TON Proxy).
All of these services can be free for the users since the application owners may choose to cover the 
corresponding fees, and adopt a freemium or an advertisement-based business model. 
14 / 23
Roadmap
The TON and Telegram technical roadmaps include the following milestones:
Q3 2013Launch of Telegram Messenger and the Telegram API
Q2 2015Launch of the Bot API and Platform
Q2 2017Launch of the Payments Platform
Q2 2017
Q1 2018
Q2 2018
Q3 2018
Q4 2018
Q4 2018
Q1 2019
Q2 2019
Start of the development of TON
Launch of Telegram External Secure ID
Launch of the Minimal Viable Test Network of TON
Testing and security audits of TON
Deployment of the stable version of TON
Launch of Telegram Wallet
Creation of TON-based economy in Telegram
Launch of TON Services, TON Storage, and TON Proxy
Telegram will also continue shipping monthly product updates that are not related to TON. 
15 / 23
Token Distribution
To obtain the resources required to make TON a reality, Telegram is launching a token 
sale in Q1 2018. The token sale will likely use a SAFT10 to be converted 1:1 to native 
TON tokens (Grams) after the deployment of the TON Blockchain in Q4 2018.
The total supply of native TON tokens (Grams) 
will equal 5 billion.
After the TON Blockchain is fully deployed, the annual inflation rate derived from the fundamental 
parameters of TON is projected at two percent. This inflation represents a payment made by all 
members of the community to the validators for keeping the system functional.
See «Validators», 2 .6 .1, «Original supply, mining rewards and inflation», A.3.
Four percent of the supply (200 million Grams) will be reserved for the development team with a 
4-year vesting period. During the initial stage of active TON development, at least 52 percent of 
the entire supply will be retained by the TON Reserve to protect the nascent cryptocurrency from 
speculative trading and to maintain flexibility at the early stages of the evolution of the system. 
The remaining 44 percent (2.2 billion Grams) can be sold in accordance with the formula below:
p−9
n := 0.1 × (1 + 10)n USD
The price of the first token to be sold will be approximately 0.1 USD, with and each successive 
token will be priced one billionth higher than the previous one. As a result, the additional supply 
10. See the SAFT Project.
16 / 23
coming from the TON Reserve will always be more expensive than the price paid by any of the 
existing buyers.11 This structure should allow the market to define the fair price and volume for the 
token sale.
A bulk pre-sale of TON tokens to a group of institutional investors for a fiat currency is possible 
under the average price per token or higher, depending on the vesting period and the volume 
of the transaction. 
1.1price per token, $2.2
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
tokens sold, bln
0.511.522.5
44%potentially 
sold investors
4%
4-year vesting 
by developers
52%retained 
by the TON Reserve
11. See section A.4 in the Technical White Paper, «Original price of Grams».
17 / 23
Use of Funds
Funds raised during the Telegram ICO will be used for the development of Telegram 
and TON and for the ongoing expenses required to support the growth of the 
ecosystem.
More than 80 percent of collected funds will be spent on equipment, bandwidth, 
colocation, and user verification costs. The rest will be allocated for wages, offices, and legal 
and consulting services.
80%
20%
The annual budget of Telegram in 2017 amounted to $70 million, out of which $62 million were 
spent on equipment, bandwidth, colocation, and user verification costs. Telegram’s spending is 
projected at $400 million in the next three years (approximately $100 million in 2018, $130 million 
in 2019, and $170 million in 2020). A total spending of about $620 million to support continuing 
organic user growth should allow Telegram to reach one billion active users by January 1, 2022. 
MAU, mlnBudget, $ mln
675220
170
450
130
300100
200
50
25
150
100
20142015201620172018
20192020
2021
37
70
46
18
20142015201620172018
201920202021
18 / 23
Governance
The founders of Telegram will be responsible for the efficient use of funds resulting 
from any sale of tokens from the TON Reserve. Over time, all responsibilities related 
to TON and its Reserve will be transferred to the TON Foundation, a not-for-profit 
organization.
By 2021 the initial TON vision and architecture will have been implemented and deployed. TON will 
then let go of the «Telegram» element in its name and become «The Open Network».
From then on, the continuous evolution of the TON Blockchain will be maintained by 
the TON Foundation.
Telegram will serve as a launch pad for TON, ensuring its technological superiority and widespread 
adoption on the initial stages, but the future of TON is in the hands of the global open-source 
community. 
Telegram Open Network      The Open Network
19 / 23
Te a m
Telegram has a world-class team of 15 developers that were selected from thousands 
of contenders over the last ten years. To become part of the team, each of its current 
members had either to win in the world’s top programming contests or to take the 
first place in one of the nationwide multi-level coding competitions held by the 
founder of Telegram.
Core team members have ten years of experience in building scalable projects for tens of millions 
of users. Before building Telegram, they created  VK, the largest Europe-based social network with 
more than 100 million active users, which still enjoys a dominating share in its local markets.
The Telegram backend team, which has an unparalleled ratio of winners of worldwide 
coding competitions, specializes in creating secure data storage engines for distributed server 
infrastructures. All networking, cryptographic, and database engine software running on thousands 
of Telegram servers is custom-built by these developers.
Founders
Dr. Nikolai Durov
Phd (Bonn University), Phd (Saint-Petersburg State University)
› 2013-present: Co-founder, CTO, Architect, Lead C/C++ Engineer at Telegram. Built 
MTProto and Telegram’s distributed data storage engines;
› 2006-2013: Co-founder, CTO, Architect, Lead C/C++ Engineer at VK. Built data storage 
and networking software. 
Awards
› Absolute World Champion in Programming (2000, 2001) — one of ten people 
in history to win the ACM International Collegiate Programming Contest twice;
› Gold Medals in International Mathematical Olympiads (1996, 1997, 1998);
› Gold and Silver Medals in International Olympiads in Informatics 
(1995, 1996, 1997, 1998). 
Nikolai is a renowned mathematician and a world-class programmer, uniquely combined 
in one person. At the age of 8 Nikolai already solved cubic equations.12 He started coding 
12. Nikolai was invited to demonstrate this skill on the main TV channel of Italy, where the Durovs 
lived at the time.
20 / 23
at 9, and by 13 he built a full-fledged operating system for Intel 80386 microprocessors in 
x86 assembly language. While spending summers in Siberia without access to a computer, 
11-year old Nikolay filled hundreds of pages with x86 assembly code, creating programs such 
as a Forth interpreter entirely on paper. As a CTO and guru in distributed systems, he scaled 
VK and then Telegram to tens of millions of daily users. In 2014 Nikolai became interested in 
Bitcoin and related technologies. His research on these topics culminated in TON’s Technical 
White Paper, where he summarized the advancements of blockchain technology and 
proposed a novel architecture for scalable decentralized ledgers.
Pavel Durov
› 2013-present: Co-founder, CEO, Product Manager at Telegram;
› 2006-2013: Co-founder, CEO, Product Manager, Lead Developer at VK. 
Awards
› The most promising Northern European leader under 30 (2014);13
› Young Global Leader by the World Economic Forum (2017).14
Pavel first gained international recognition for founding VK, which under his leadership 
commanded a 70 percent market share in Russia, Ukraine and Belorussia, eclipsing Facebook 
and other competing social networks. An outspoken libertarian, he published free market 
manifestos urging the Russian government to deregulate and decentralize the country’s 
economy. Pavel was forced to sell VK and leave Russia in 2014 after a clash with the 
government over his users’ privacy and freedom of speech. 
Pavel started coding at 10, and at 11 he already created his first multiplayer strategy 
game. As a teenager, he built popular online communication tools for fellow students. At 
21 he single-handedly coded the first version of VK. Pavel founded Telegram and became 
interested in cryptocurrencies in 2013, when he spent $1.5 million of his savings on Bitcoin 
that he holds to this day.
13. VKontakte’s Founder Pavel Durov the Most Promising Northern European Leader Under 
the Age of 30.
14. Young Global Leader, Class of 2017.
21 / 23
Other Notable Team Members
Aliaksei Levin
› 2013-present: C/C++ Engineer at Telegram. Developed distributed data storage engines, 
client cross-platform libraries, and the bot API;
› 2010-2013: C/C++ Engineer at VK. Built data storage engines and created the custom 
programming language KPHP for high-level backend developers. 
Awards
› Gold Medal, ACM International Programming Contest World Finals (2011);
› Silver Medal, ACM International Programming Contest World Finals (2010);
› First Prize, International Mathematics Competition for University Students (2009);
› Gold Medal, First Place, International Mathematical Olympiad (2005);
› Silver Medal, International Mathematical Olympiad (2004).
Vitalik Valtman
› 2013-present: C/C++ Engineer at Telegram. Developed networking and data storage 
engines;
› 2010-2013: C/C++ Engineer at VK. Developed networking and data storage engines. 
Awards
› Silver Medal, ACM International Programming Contest World Finals (2006);
› 4th place, Top Coder Open;
› 4th place, Top Coder Collegiate Contest.
Arseny Smirnov
› 2013-present: C/C++ Engineer at Telegram. Developed server data storage engines, client 
cross-platform libraries, and bot API;
› 2010-2013: C/C++ Engineer at VK. Developed data storage engines and created the 
custom programming language KPHP for high-level backend developers. 
Awards
› Gold Medal, ACM International Programming Contest World Finals (2011);
› Silver Medal, ACM International Programming Contest World Finals (2010).
22 / 23
John
› 2014-present: Client C++ Engineer at Telegram.
Single-handedly built Telegram Desktop;
› 2007-2013: Lead backend/frontend Engineer at VK
after winning a nationwide contest in JS.
Igor
› 2014-present: Lead Backend Engineer at Telegram. 
Built the entire Telegram API for client apps;
› 2007-2013: Lead backend/frontend Engineer at VK 
after winning a nationwide contest in JS. 
DrKlo
› 2014-present: Android Engineer at Telegram after
winning a nationwide contest in Android Java. Built
Telegram for Android;
› 2012-2013: iOS Engineer at VK after winning a
nationwide contest in Objective C.
Peter
› 2014-present: iOS/Swift Engineer at Telegram. 
Built Telegram for iOS (Objective C). Built Telegram 
Beta for iOS (Swift);
› 2012-2013: iOS Engineer at VK after winning a 
nationwide contest in Objective C.
Grisha
› 2016-present: Cross Platform Developer
at Telegram. Builds voice calls;
› 2010-2016: Android Engineer at VK after winning
a nationwide contest in Java for Android. Single-
handedly built the VK app for Android.
Kolar
› 2014-present: Backend/Frontend Engineer at 
Telegram. Built the Instant View Platform, the 
Translations Platform, telegra.ph, telesco.pe, etc.;
› 2010-2013: Lead backend/frontend Engineer at VK 
after winning a nationwide contest in JS.
Ilya
› 2013-present: iOS/Swift Engineer at Telegram after
several winning a nationwide contest in Objective
C. Built multiple features for Telegram iOS.
Igor
› 2013-present: Infrastructure Architect at Telegram. 
Scaled Telegram to tens of thousands of servers;
› 2008-2013: Senior System Engineer. Scaled VK 
to tens of thousands of servers.
23 / 23
